% Lambda the Ultimate CPU Architecture

While not directly related to the SECD machine, something would be seriously amiss if I neglected to mention Sussman and Steele's [Design of LISP-based Processors, or SCHEME: A Dielectric LISP, or Finite Memories Considered Harmful, or LAMBDA: The Ultimate Opcode](http://repository.readscheme.org/ftp/papers/ai-lab-pubs/AIM-514.pdf), MIT AI Memo No. 514. The very idea of functions as the core primitives of a hardware architecture can likely be traced back to this paper. All of Sussman and Steele's [similarly-named papers](http://library.readscheme.org/page1.html) are major sources of influence and motivation for Seax.

Also worthy of looking into are the MIT [Lisp Machines](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp_machine) built in the 1970s and 80s. These computers, which were designed to run Lisp programs language as efficiently as possible, used a stack-based CPU architecture called CADR, with many similarities to the SECD machine. The CADR computer architecture is described in [MIT AI Memo No. 528](ftp://publications.ai.mit.edu/ai-publications/pdf/AIM-528.pdf), by Thomas F. Knight, Jr., David Moon, Jack Holloway, and Guy L. Steele, Jr.

The Lisp machines were very far ahead of their time, with the distinction of being among the earliest computers to boast high-resolution bitmapped graphics, window-based graphical user interfaces, mice, and automatic memory management. While these beautiful computers are no longer manufactured, hopefully the Seax VM will help to 'keep the torch alive' for functional-programming-based computer architectures.